---
layout: post
title: "Early, goal-directed mobilisation in the surgical intensive care unit: a randomised controlled trial"
modified: 2017-09-19T22:12:47
categories: articles
excerpt: "BACKGROUND: Immobilisation predicts adverse outcomes in patients in the surgical intensive care unit (SICU). Attempts to mobilise critically ill patients early after surgery are frequently restricted, but we tested whether (Reviewed by Keir Pickard)"
tags: [['lancet', 'keir_pickard']]
image:
  feature:
author: Jennifer Hunter
---

__Keir Pickard__ reviewing Schaller SJ, Anstey M, and Blobner M, et al. Early, goal-directed mobilisation in the surgical intensive care unit: a randomised controlled trial. _Lancet_ **2016**;388;1377-1388. https://doi.org/S0140-6736(16)31637-3

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=27707496) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/dTKfUZTH)

### Commentary

## Summary

This international, multicentre RCT investigated whether early, goal-directed mobilisation improves patient outcomes in the surgical ICU (SICU). The study included post-operative patients on SICU over the age of 18 who had been mechanically ventilated for <48 hours and were functionally independent at baseline. After exclusions the intention-to-treat analysis included 104 patients in the intervention arm and 96 in the control arm, who received mobilisation in line with the centres existing protocols. The intervention group were allocated a facilitator who identified a mobilisation goal each day (using the SICU Optimum Mobilisation Score (SOMS) which was created by the authors of the study and ranges from 0 (no activity) to 4 (ambulation)) on the morning WR and facilitated MDT communication to identify barriers and guide clinicians to the goal. Primary end point was level of mobility during SICU admission (measured by SOMS), and secondary end points were SICU LOS and functional mobility at discharge. Results demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in all three domains within the intervention group:

 - SOMS level 4 in 52% of intervention vs 25% control (p <0.0001)
 - LOS -3 days in intervention group (p 0.0054)
 - Mean functional mobility score +3 in intervention group (p 0.0002)

## Comment

Interestingly the study also demonstrated a significant increase in delirium-free days within the intervention group (-3 days compared to control, p 0.016). Analysis of the data did demonstrate an increased mortality in the intervention group which was almost, but not quite, statistically significant (16% vs 8% p 0.09). **This study does seem to suggest that early, goal-directed mobilisation with good MDT communication can improve patient mobility within ICU and at discharge, and reduces LOS in ICU.** Limitations of the study included the fact that patients and clinicians were unblinded (goal stuck up at bedside), patients within intervention group received more physiotherapy (mean 60mins vs 48) and each centre would have a different protocol for the control group. Overall I feel this strategy would be beneficial to SICU patients, and it would be interesting to compare the intervention method to our own practice at UCH.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> BACKGROUND: Immobilisation predicts adverse outcomes in patients in the surgical intensive care unit (SICU). Attempts to mobilise critically ill patients early after surgery are frequently restricted, but we tested whether early mobilisation leads to improved mobility, decreased SICU length of stay, and increased functional independence of patients at hospital discharge. METHODS: We did a multicentre, international, parallel-group, assessor-blinded, randomised controlled trial in SICUs of five university hospitals in Austria (n=1), Germany (n=1), and the USA (n=3). Eligible patients (aged 18 years or older, who had been mechanically ventilated for <48 h, and were expected to require mechanical ventilation for >/=24 h) were randomly assigned (1:1) by use of a stratified block randomisation via restricted web platform to standard of care (control) or early, goal-directed mobilisation using an inter-professional approach of closed-loop communication and the SICU optimal mobilisation score (SOMS) algorithm (intervention), which describes patients' mobilisation capacity on a numerical rating scale ranging from 0 (no mobilisation) to 4 (ambulation). We had three main outcomes hierarchically tested in a prespecified order: the mean SOMS level patients achieved during their SICU stay (primary outcome), and patient's length of stay on SICU and the mini-modified functional independence measure score (mmFIM) at hospital discharge (both secondary outcomes). This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01363102). FINDINGS: Between July 1, 2011, and Nov 4, 2015, we randomly assigned 200 patients to receive standard treatment (control; n=96) or intervention (n=104). Intention-to-treat analysis showed that the intervention improved the mobilisation level (mean achieved SOMS 2.2 [SD 1.0] in intervention group vs 1.5 [0.8] in control group, p<0.0001), decreased SICU length of stay (mean 7 days [SD 5-12] in intervention group vs 10 days [6-15] in control group, p=0.0054), and improved functional mobility at hospital discharge (mmFIM score 8 [4-8] in intervention group vs 5 [2-8] in control group, p=0.0002). More adverse events were reported in the intervention group (25 cases [2.8%]) than in the control group (ten cases [0.8%]); no serious adverse events were observed. Before hospital discharge 25 patients died (17 [16%] in the intervention group, eight [8%] in the control group). 3 months after hospital discharge 36 patients died (21 [22%] in the intervention group, 15 [17%] in the control group). INTERPRETATION: Early, goal-directed mobilisation improved patient mobilisation throughout SICU admission, shortened patient length of stay in the SICU, and improved patients' functional mobility at hospital discharge. FUNDING: Jeffrey and Judy Buzen.

Edited by __Jennifer Hunter__
