---
layout: post
title: "Communicating with conscious and mechanically ventilated critically ill patients: a systematic review"
modified: 2017-05-17T07:13:19
categories: articles
excerpt: "Bold attempt to review evidence on communication methods for mechanically ventilated patients (Reviewed by Behrad Beharlo)"
tags: [['crit_care', 'behrad_beharlo', 'respiratory', 'systematic-review', 'communication']]
image:
  feature:
author: Steve Harris
---

__Behrad Beharlo__ reviewing Ten Hoorn S, Elbers PW, and Girbes AR, et al. Communicating with conscious and mechanically ventilated critically ill patients: a systematic review. _Crit Care_ **2016**;20;333. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-016-1483-2

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=27756433) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/3oSm6Utx)

### Commentary

This Dutch group rather boldly attempted to review and rationalise the published evidence currently available on communication methods employed with mechanically ventilated patients with an endotracheal tube or a tracheostomy tube (with an inflated cuff).

Reviewing the evidence available for a variety of augmentative and alternative communication methods the authors satisfied the primary aim for the study and in doing so allowed for a credible attempt at establishing an algorithm for an approach to assistive communication in ventilated patients thus satisfying their secondary aim. The method employed to search, screen and include studies were transparent though there is clearly a paucity of evidence in this field. This meant the review suffered not only from the heterogeneous nature of studies included, it was also limited by the inherent flaws of the individual studies  though this was clearly anticipated and reported by the authors in their data analysis. Unsurprisingly, they were unable to perform a meta-analyses instead opting to conduct a narrative synthesis of the data in view of the fact the overwhelming number of studies were case series or reports.

Four broad categories of communication methods were identified and summarised to include communication boards, speaking valves, the electrolarynx and high tech ancillary devices. The predominant advantages and claims were illustrated though the small numbers involved limited potential inferences to be made. Subsequently, as a result of preferences of a local working group a coherent algorithm for selecting potential communication methods with intubated patients was described. **Though the contents would be open to debate and need validating the authors intended for this to act as an initial step to rationalising communication method selection and aid future research in this field.**

---

### Pubmed abstract

> BACKGROUND: Ventilator-dependent patients in the ICU often experience difficulties with one of the most basic human functions, namely communication, due to intubation. Although various assistive communication tools exist, these are infrequently used in ICU patients. We summarized the current evidence on communication methods with mechanically ventilated patients in the ICU. Secondly, we developed an algorithm for communication with these patients based on current evidence. METHODS: We performed a systematic review. PubMed, Embase, Cochrane, Cinahl, PsychInfo, and Web of Science databases were systematically searched to November 2015. Studies that reported a communication intervention with conscious nonverbal mechanically ventilated patients in the ICU aged 18 years or older were included. The methodological quality was assessed using the Quality Assessment Tool. RESULTS: The search yielded 9883 publications, of which 31 articles, representing 29 different studies, fulfilled the inclusion criteria. The overall methodological quality varied from poor to moderate. We identified four communication intervention types: (1) communication boards were studied in three studies-they improved communication and increased patient satisfaction, but they can be time-consuming and limit the ability to produce novel utterances; (2) two types of specialized talking tracheostomy tubes were assessed in eight studies-audible voicing was achieved in the majority of patients (range 74-100 %), but more studies are needed to facilitate safe and effective use; (3) an electrolarynx improved communication in seven studies-its effectiveness was mainly demonstrated with tracheostomized patients; and (4) "high-tech" augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) devices in nine studies with diverse computerized AAC devices proved to be beneficial communication methods-two studies investigated multiple AAC interventions, and different control devices (e.g., touch-sensitive or eye/blink detection) can be used to ensure that physical limitations do not prevent use of the devices. We developed an algorithm for the assessment and selection of a communication intervention with nonverbal and conscious mechanically intubated patients in the ICU. CONCLUSIONS: Although evidence is limited, results suggest that most communication methods may be effective in improving patient-healthcare professional communication with mechanically ventilated patients. A combination of methods is advised. We developed an algorithm to standardize the approach for selection of communication techniques.

Edited by __Steve Harris__
