---
layout: post
title: "Effect of an Early Resuscitation Protocol on In-hospital Mortality Among Adults With Sepsis and Hypotension JAMA. 2017;318(13):1233-1240."
modified: 2017-12-04T07:10:14
categories: articles
excerpt: "Non-blinded RCT in Zambia; adults with sepsis and hypotension that were randomised to a fluid bolus protocol had higher in-hospital and 28 d (Reviewed by Dr Hannah Barton)"
tags: [['jama', 'dr_hannah_barton']]
image:
  feature:
author: Dr Alex Hunter
---

__Dr Hannah Barton__ reviewing Andrews B, Semler MW, and Muchemwa L, et al. Effect of an Early Resuscitation Protocol on In-hospital Mortality Among Adults With Sepsis and Hypotension: A Randomized Clinical Trial. _JAMA_ **2017**;318;1233-1240. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2017.10913

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=28973227) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/WTPFvoBO)

### Commentary

Targeted fluid therapy is a key component of sepsis management. This study looked at whether a standardised fluid protocol improved outcomes among adults who presented with sepsis (2 SIRS criteria and a source of infection) and hypotension to the ED of a large hospital in Zambia. A similar study in the same hospital had been stopped early due to evidence of increased mortality among adults presenting with hypoxaemia and tachypnoea. For this reason 20% of eligible patients were excluded from this study. This was a randomised non-blinded single centre study. Over 6 hours, those assigned to protocol driven care, received a 2L fluid bolus and then a further 2L unless they exhibited clinical signs of fluid overload as measured by changes in JVP (on examination), respiratory rate and oxygen saturation. 

The fluid protocol group had a higher primary outcome of in-hospital mortality (48.1%vs 33% mortality RR=1.46) as well as in 28 day mortality, than the control group. The study participants were young (mean age 37.5/35.8), malnourished/underweight, had been at home unwell for some time, and nearly 95% had HIV. In the supplementary data around half had objective evidence of infection (positive blood cultures or malaria screen), around 20% participants in both arms had blood cultures positive for M. tuberculosis. 

Reasons for poorer outcome in the study arm are likely linked to patient specific factors and a non-tailored fluid management protocol causing respiratory deterioration in a context where there is minimal access to critical care, invasive ventilation and advanced monitoring.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> Importance: The effect of an early resuscitation protocol on sepsis outcomes in developing countries remains unknown. Objective: To determine whether an early resuscitation protocol with administration of intravenous fluids, vasopressors, and blood transfusion decreases mortality among Zambian adults with sepsis and hypotension compared with usual care. Design, Setting, and Participants: Randomized clinical trial of 212 adults with sepsis (suspected infection plus >/=2 systemic inflammatory response syndrome criteria) and hypotension (systolic blood pressure </=90 mm Hg or mean arterial pressure </=65 mm Hg) presenting to the emergency department at a 1500-bed referral hospital in Zambia between October 22, 2012, and November 11, 2013. Data collection concluded December 9, 2013. Interventions: Patients were randomized 1:1 to either (1) an early resuscitation protocol for sepsis (n = 107) that included intravenous fluid bolus administration with monitoring of jugular venous pressure, respiratory rate, and arterial oxygen saturation and treatment with vasopressors targeting mean arterial pressure (>/=65 mm Hg) and blood transfusion (for patients with a hemoglobin level <7 g/dL) or (2) usual care (n = 105) in which treating clinicians determined hemodynamic management. Main Outcomes and Measures: The primary outcome was in-hospital mortality and the secondary outcomes included the volume of intravenous fluid received and receipt of vasopressors. Results: Among 212 patients randomized to receive either the sepsis protocol or usual care, 3 were ineligible and the remaining 209 completed the study and were included in the analysis (mean [SD] age, 36.7 [12.4] years; 117 men [56.0%]; 187 [89.5%] positive for the human immunodeficiency virus). The primary outcome of in-hospital mortality occurred in 51 of 106 patients (48.1%) in the sepsis protocol group compared with 34 of 103 patients (33.0%) in the usual care group (between-group difference, 15.1% [95% CI, 2.0%-28.3%]; relative risk, 1.46 [95% CI, 1.04-2.05]; P = .03). In the 6 hours after presentation to the emergency department, patients in the sepsis protocol group received a median of 3.5 L (interquartile range, 2.7-4.0 L) of intravenous fluid compared with 2.0 L (interquartile range, 1.0-2.5 L) in the usual care group (mean difference, 1.2 L [95% CI, 1.0-1.5 L]; P < .001). Fifteen patients (14.2%) in the sepsis protocol group and 2 patients (1.9%) in the usual care group received vasopressors (between-group difference, 12.3% [95% CI, 5.1%-19.4%]; P < .001). Conclusions and Relevance: Among adults with sepsis and hypotension, most of whom were positive for HIV, in a resource-limited setting, a protocol for early resuscitation with administration of intravenous fluids and vasopressors increased in-hospital mortality compared with usual care. Further studies are needed to understand the effects of administration of intravenous fluid boluses and vasopressors in patients with sepsis across different low- and middle-income clinical settings and patient populations. Trial Registration: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01663701.

Edited by __Dr Alex Hunter__