---
layout: post
title: "Angiotensin II for the Treatment of Vasodilatory Shock Khanna et al. NEJM May 2017"
modified: 2017-10-16T06:55:55
categories: articles
excerpt: "Angiotensin II, when added to high dose noradrenaline infusion, is associated with an improvement in blood pressure at 3 hours when compared (Reviewed by Dr. Caroline Clapham)"
tags: [['n_engl_j_med', 'dr_caroline_clapham']]
image:
  feature:
author: Dr. Lucy Yang
---

__Dr. Caroline Clapham__ reviewing Khanna A, English SW, and Wang XS, et al. Angiotensin II for the Treatment of Vasodilatory Shock. _N Engl J Med_ **2017**;377;419-430. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1704154

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=28528561) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/84hyR71N)

### Commentary

The ATHOS-3 trial was conducted in an attempt to assess a third class of vasopressor for vasodilatory shock. Patients who have refractory shock have high mortality, and following fluid resuscitation, we currently only have catecholamines (such as noradrenaline) and vasopressin to support blood pressure. In animal models and a single pilot study, angiotensin II showed promise as a potential vasopressor. The investigators of this study sought to address the question: in patients with refractory vasodilatory shock, does the addition of angiotensin II (ATII) improve blood pressure compared with standard vasopressor therapy? 

The ATHOS- 3 investigators conducted a prospective, international, multi-center, double-blind, randomised controlled trial. It was conducted in 75 centres across North America, Australia, Asia, and Europe from May 2015 to January 2017. 

A total of 321 patients with refractory shock were randomised to receive either Angiotensin II or placebo. Refractory shock was defined as:  > 0.2ug/kg/min of norepinephrine or equivalent for 6-48 hours to maintain MAP 55-70mmHg. The primary end-point was MAP  75 or increase from baseline of > 10mmHg at 3 hours after the start of infusion. Patient's were followed up for 28 days and results were analysed according to a modified intention-to-treat. 

The most common cause of vasodilatory shock was sepsis and there were no significant differences in baseline demographics between the two treatment groups.  Patient's who received Angiotensin II were almost 8 times more likely to achieve the primary endpoint (improvement in MAP at 3 hours), 114 patients (69.9%) vs. 37 patients (23.4%) [OR 7.95, p<0.001]. There were no significant differences in all cause mortality or adverse events between the two groups (although the trial was under-powered to look at such outcomes). 

This study showed that Angiotensin II, when added to high dose noradrenaline infusion, is associated with an improvement in blood pressure at 3 hours when compared to placebo, and with no apparent increase in adverse effects. Further studies in patient's with vasodilatory shock are required to determine results in clinically relevant patient-orientated outcomes.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> BACKGROUND: Vasodilatory shock that does not respond to high-dose vasopressors is associated with high mortality. We investigated the effectiveness of angiotensin II for the treatment of patients with this condition. METHODS: We randomly assigned patients with vasodilatory shock who were receiving more than 0.2 mug of norepinephrine per kilogram of body weight per minute or the equivalent dose of another vasopressor to receive infusions of either angiotensin II or placebo. The primary end point was a response with respect to mean arterial pressure at hour 3 after the start of infusion, with response defined as an increase from baseline of at least 10 mm Hg or an increase to at least 75 mm Hg, without an increase in the dose of background vasopressors. RESULTS: A total of 344 patients were assigned to one of the two regimens; 321 received a study intervention (163 received angiotensin II, and 158 received placebo) and were included in the analysis. The primary end point was reached by more patients in the angiotensin II group (114 of 163 patients, 69.9%) than in the placebo group (37 of 158 patients, 23.4%) (odds ratio, 7.95; 95% confidence interval [CI], 4.76 to 13.3; P<0.001). At 48 hours, the mean improvement in the cardiovascular Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score (scores range from 0 to 4, with higher scores indicating more severe dysfunction) was greater in the angiotensin II group than in the placebo group (-1.75 vs. -1.28, P=0.01). Serious adverse events were reported in 60.7% of the patients in the angiotensin II group and in 67.1% in the placebo group. Death by day 28 occurred in 75 of 163 patients (46%) in the angiotensin II group and in 85 of 158 patients (54%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.57 to 1.07; P=0.12). CONCLUSIONS: Angiotensin II effectively increased blood pressure in patients with vasodilatory shock that did not respond to high doses of conventional vasopressors. (Funded by La Jolla Pharmaceutical Company; ATHOS-3 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02338843 .).

Edited by __Dr. Lucy Yang__