---
layout: post
title: "Effect of an automated notification system for deteriorating ward patients on clinical outcomes"
modified: 2017-10-04T23:12:19
categories: articles
excerpt: "Use of electronic automated vital signs monitoring and notification system appears to reduce mortality on one respiratory medical ward, but  (Reviewed by Jenny Taylor)"
tags: [['crit_care', 'jenny_taylor']]
image:
  feature:
author: Lucy Yang
---

__Jenny Taylor__ reviewing Subbe CP, Duller B, and Bellomo R, et al. Effect of an automated notification system for deteriorating ward patients on clinical outcomes. _Crit Care_ **2017**;21;52. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-017-1635-z

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=28288655) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/jRxDkfNt)

### Commentary

This is a before and after study taking place on two medical wards of a district general hospital, to study the effect of an electronic automated vital signs monitoring on patient outcome as compared to nurse-led monitoring and escalation. During the year-long intervention period, the automated monitoring system directly notified the rapid response team (RRT) of a rise in patients early warning scores. Vital signs monitoring was deployed to 278 patients (out of a total of approx. 2000 admissions) as chosen by the medical team. A wide range of outcomes was measured, and most differences seen were not statistically significant. Two interventions  administration of bronchodilators and antibiotics  were more commonly performed in the study group than the control. There was a significant reduction in mortality on the respiratory ward only  from 11.2% to 8.4% between control and intervention periods. The study was lacking in specific aims and the intervention was variable  different cableless devices were used and each at the clinicians discretion. It would be helpful to include surgical patients in the study.

Overall this was an interesting study, but I did not feel there was strong enough evidence to change practice.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> BACKGROUND: Delayed response to clinical deterioration of ward patients is common. METHODS: We performed a prospective before-and-after study in all patients admitted to two clinical ward areas in a district general hospital in the UK. We examined the effect on clinical outcomes of deploying an electronic automated advisory vital signs monitoring and notification system, which relayed abnormal vital signs to a rapid response team (RRT). RESULTS: We studied 2139 patients before (control) and 2263 after the intervention. During the intervention the number of RRT notifications increased from 405 to 524 (p = 0.001) with more notifications triggering fluid therapy, bronchodilators and antibiotics. Moreover, despite an increase in the number of patients with "do not attempt resuscitation" orders (from 99 to 135; p = 0.047), mortality decreased from 173 to 147 (p = 0.042) patients and cardiac arrests decreased from 14 to 2 events (p = 0.002). Finally, the severity of illness in patients admitted to the ICU was reduced (mean Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II score: 26 (SD 9) vs. 18 (SD 8)), as was their mortality (from 45% to 24%; p = 0.04). CONCLUSIONS: Deployment of an electronic automated advisory vital signs monitoring and notification system to signal clinical deterioration in ward patients was associated with significant improvements in key patient-centered clinical outcomes. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01692847 . Registered on 21 September 2012.

Edited by __Lucy Yang__