---
layout: post
title: "Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2016"
modified: 2017-09-19T22:12:51
categories: articles
excerpt: "OBJECTIVE: To provide an update to Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2012. DESIGN: A consensus committee of 55 international experts representing 25 international organizations (Reviewed by Jennifer Hunter)"
tags: [['intensive_care_med', 'jennifer_hunter']]
image:
  feature:
author: Jennifer Hunter
---

__Jennifer Hunter__ reviewing Rhodes A, Evans LE, and Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2016. _Intensive Care Med_ **2017**;43;304-377. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00134-017-4683-6

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=28101605) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/Qa04We9p)

### Commentary

##Summary
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign has published its fourth edition of guidelines for management of sepsis, encompassing the new definitions of sepsis and septic shock as defined by the Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock. These guidelines provide recommendations with a rating of the strength of the recommendation (weak or strong) and a grading of the evidence (low, moderate or high quality of evidence).

Sepsis is newly defined as **life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection**. Organ dysfunction is now assessed by the **SOFA (Sequential Organ Failure Assessment) score**, and the SIRS criteria are no longer used in the definition of sepsis. These new definitions differentiate the sepsis syndrome from other infection which may meet SIRS criteria but does not cause life threatening organ dysfunction. This change aims to provide more clinically useful criteria for sepsis, and means that simple infection cases should not be included in audit and trial data regarding sepsis management and outcomes.

A significant change in the new Surviving Sepsis guidelines is the switch from recommending early goal directed fluid therapy for initial resuscitation to a recommendation for 30ml per kilogram of IV crystalloid over the first three hours, with further fluid therapy being directed by frequent reassessment using a broader clinical assessment of filling status. The recommendation for a target mean arterial pressure of over 65mmHg has not changed, with a recommendation to use dynamic over static measures of filling status. These changes are based on results from the **PROCESS and ARISE trials**, both published in 2014, which both showed that using early goal directed therapy resuscitation strategies in management of sepsis had no benefit over clinical judgement of fluid requirements in terms of morbidity and mortality.
Regarding antibiotics therapy, there is no change in the recommendation for empiric broad spectrum antibiotics with a focus on early cessation or de-escalation as appropriate. Combination antibiotic therapy is recommended for now septic shock; this was previously recommended for severe sepsis, and severe sepsis is not used as a classification in the new guidelines.

##Comment
The main changes that will have an impact on practice are the change to fluid resuscitation recommendations, and the new definition of sepsis. Whilst there has already been a shift away from early goal directed therapy to targets in clinical practice, this advice will further reinforce the move towards a more general clinical assessment of filling status. The advice to give 30ml per kilogram of crystalloid over the first 3 hours is particularly useful in an Emergency Department setting.

The new definition of sepsis will be useful in that simple infections presenting to hospital should be less likely to be labelled as sepsis. However, the new q-SOFA score will have to be applied carefully in the Emergency Department, as whilst it is very useful as a tool to alert a clinician to the possibility of sepsis, there is a danger of it overloading emergency services with cases of possible sepsis if applied too broadly in an emergency setting.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> OBJECTIVE: To provide an update to "Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2012". DESIGN: A consensus committee of 55 international experts representing 25 international organizations was convened. Nominal groups were assembled at key international meetings (for those committee members attending the conference). A formal conflict-of-interest (COI) policy was developed at the onset of the process and enforced throughout. A stand-alone meeting was held for all panel members in December 2015. Teleconferences and electronic-based discussion among subgroups and among the entire committee served as an integral part of the development. METHODS: The panel consisted of five sections: hemodynamics, infection, adjunctive therapies, metabolic, and ventilation. Population, intervention, comparison, and outcomes (PICO) questions were reviewed and updated as needed, and evidence profiles were generated. Each subgroup generated a list of questions, searched for best available evidence, and then followed the principles of the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system to assess the quality of evidence from high to very low, and to formulate recommendations as strong or weak, or best practice statement when applicable. RESULTS: The Surviving Sepsis Guideline panel provided 93 statements on early management and resuscitation of patients with sepsis or septic shock. Overall, 32 were strong recommendations, 39 were weak recommendations, and 18 were best-practice statements. No recommendation was provided for four questions. CONCLUSIONS: Substantial agreement exists among a large cohort of international experts regarding many strong recommendations for the best care of patients with sepsis. Although a significant number of aspects of care have relatively weak support, evidence-based recommendations regarding the acute management of sepsis and septic shock are the foundation of improved outcomes for these critically ill patients with high mortality.

Edited by __Jennifer Hunter__
