---
layout: post
title: "Physiologic Effects of High-flow Nasal Cannula in Acute Hypoxemic Respiratory Failure."
modified: 2017-09-19T22:11:03
categories: articles
excerpt: "HFNC improves several key parameters including minute ventilation, lung volumes, oxygenation (Reviewed by Alina Balint)"
tags: [['am_j_respir_crit_care_med', 'alina_balint']]
image:
  feature:
author: Jennifer Hunter
---

__Alina Balint__ reviewing Mauri T, Turrini C, and Eronia N, et al. Physiologic Effects of High-Flow Nasal Cannula in Acute Hypoxemic Respiratory Failure. _Am J Respir Crit Care Med_ **2017**;195;1207-1215. https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201605-0916OC

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=27997805) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/oMBE7nwx)

### Commentary

## Quick summary

High-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) is a non-invasive form of respiratory support designed to deliver 30-60L/min of heated, humidified air and oxygen, that has been suggested may reduce re-intubation rates and mortality of acute hypoxemic respiratory failure (AHRF) patients.
This study shows that in AHRF patients HFNC improves several key physiological parameters including oxygenation, inspiratory effort, minute ventilation, respiratory rate and lung volume, dynamic lung compliance, transpulmonary pressure and homogeneity of ventilation distribution.
Some findings suggest a new hypothesis on the effects of HFNC on the physiologic determinants of ventilation-induced lung injury. A decrease in driving transpulmonary pressure swings along inspiration and significant improvement in homogeneity of ventilation distribution suggests a reduced tendency to lung collapse. Increased end-expiratory lung volume induced by HFNC with unchanged tidal volume might have reduced lung strain, which seems linearly correlated with the severity of ventilation-induced lung injury.


## Comment
This study looks at physiological parameters rather than clinical outcomes such as development of ventilation-induced lung injury, need for intubation or success of extubation. There were only 15 patients included in the study. However the results showed statistically significant physiological changes which support a mechanism through which HFNC could improve clinical outcomes.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> RATIONALE: High-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) improves the clinical outcomes of nonintubated patients with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure (AHRF). OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of HFNC on gas exchange, inspiratory effort, minute ventilation, end-expiratory lung volume, dynamic compliance, and ventilation homogeneity in patients with AHRF. METHODS: This was a prospective randomized crossover study in nonintubated patients with AHRF with PaO2/setFiO2 less than or equal to 300 mm Hg admitted to the intensive care unit. We randomly applied HFNC set at 40 L/min compared with a standard nonocclusive facial mask at the same clinically set FiO2 (20 min/step). MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Toward the end of each phase, we measured arterial blood gases, inspiratory effort, and work of breathing by esophageal pressure swings (DeltaPes) and pressure time product, and we estimated changes in lung volumes and ventilation homogeneity by electrical impedance tomography. We enrolled 15 patients aged 60 +/- 14 years old with PaO2/setFiO2 130 +/- 35 mm Hg. Seven (47%) had bilateral lung infiltrates. Compared with the facial mask, HFNC significantly improved oxygenation (P < 0.001) and lowered respiratory rate (P < 0.01), DeltaPes (P < 0.01), and pressure time product (P < 0.001). During HFNC, minute ventilation was reduced (P < 0.001) at constant arterial CO2 tension and pH (P = 0.27 and P = 0.23, respectively); end-expiratory lung volume increased (P < 0.001), and tidal volume did not change (P = 0.44); the ratio of tidal volume to DeltaPes (an estimate of dynamic lung compliance) increased (P < 0.05); finally, ventilation distribution was more homogeneous (P < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: In patients with AHRF, HFNC exerts multiple physiologic effects including less inspiratory effort and improved lung volume and compliance. These benefits might underlie the clinical efficacy of HFNC.

Edited by __Jennifer Hunter__
