---
layout: post
title: "Antipyretic therapy in critically ill septic patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis"
modified: 2017-09-19T23:14:29
categories: articles
excerpt: "OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis aimed to examine the impact of antipyretic therapy on mortality in critically ill septic adults. DATA SOURCES: Literature searches were implemented in Ovid Medline, Embase, Scopus, Cumulative (Reviewed by Arthur Clegg)"
tags: [['crit_care_med', 'arthur_clegg']]
image:
  feature:
author: Jennifer Hunter
---

__Arthur Clegg__ reviewing Drewry AM, Ablordeppey EA, and Murray ET, et al. Antipyretic Therapy in Critically Ill Septic Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. _Crit Care Med_ **2017**;45;806-813. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000002285

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=28221185) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/oP2tN4bH)

### Commentary

## Summary
Fever is certainly a sign of infection. But does treatment of fever improve outcomes in patients with sepsis?

To find out, investigators conducted a meta-analysis of eight randomized trials (1507 patients) and six observational studies (2058 patients) that compared outcomes in adult patients with sepsis according to whether or not they were treated with antipyretics. Two additional observational studies examined early mortality in 15,374 patients.

**The analysis showed that the primary outcome of 28-day mortality was not significantly different between patients who received antipyretics versus those who did not (relative risk, 0.93; 95% confidence interval, 0.791.09).** Moreover, no significant between-group differences were observed in the secondary outcomes of postintervention heart rate, minute ventilation, rates of nosocomial infections, and shock reversal. A significant decrease in early mortality was observed in patients who received antipyretics (RR, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.490.92). Given the size and number of included trials, these results are unlikely to be affected by future studies.

## Comment

Decreasing early mortality is useless if it doesn't translate to reduced overall mortality. Focus on aggressive fluid resuscitation and early antibiotics. Antipyresis won't help your septic patients in terms of long term outcomes.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis aimed to examine the impact of antipyretic therapy on mortality in critically ill septic adults. DATA SOURCES: Literature searches were implemented in Ovid Medline, Embase, Scopus, Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, NHS Economic Evaluation Database, and ClinicalTrials.gov through February 2016. STUDY SELECTION: Inclusion criteria were observational or randomized studies of septic patients, evaluation of antipyretic treatment, mortality reported, and English-language version available. Studies were excluded if they enrolled pediatric patients, patients with neurologic injury, or healthy volunteers. Criteria were applied by two independent reviewers. DATA EXTRACTION: Two reviewers independently extracted data and evaluated methodologic quality. Outcomes included mortality, frequency of shock reversal, acquisition of nosocomial infections, and changes in body temperature, heart rate, and minute ventilation. Randomized and observational studies were analyzed separately. DATA SYNTHESIS: Eight randomized studies (1,507 patients) and eight observational studies (17,432 patients) were analyzed. Antipyretic therapy did not reduce 28-day/hospital mortality in the randomized studies (relative risk, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.77-1.13; I = 0.0%) or observational studies (odds ratio, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.54-1.51; I = 76.1%). Shock reversal (relative risk, 1.13; 95% CI, 0.68-1.90; I = 51.6%) and acquisition of nosocomial infections (relative risk, 1.13; 95% CI, 0.61-2.09; I = 61.0%) were also unchanged. Antipyretic therapy decreased body temperature (mean difference, -0.38 degrees C; 95% CI, -0.63 to -0.13; I = 84.0%), but not heart rate or minute ventilation. CONCLUSIONS: Antipyretic treatment does not significantly improve 28-day/hospital mortality in adult patients with sepsis.

Edited by __Jennifer Hunter__
