---
layout: post
title: "A Critical Care Societies Collaborative Statement: Burnout Syndrome in Critical Care Health-care Professionals: A call for action."
modified: 2017-10-04T22:16:21
categories: articles
excerpt: "Recognising and beating burn out syndrome in the ICU can help you, your colleagues, and your patients. (Reviewed by Ben Garfield)"
tags: [['am_j_respir_crit_care_med', 'ben_garfield']]
image:
  feature:
author: Lucy Yang
---

__Ben Garfield__ reviewing Moss M, Good VS, and Gozal D, et al. A Critical Care Societies Collaborative Statement: Burnout Syndrome in Critical Care Health-care Professionals. A Call for Action. _Am J Respir Crit Care Med_ **2016**;194;106-13. https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201604-0708ST

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=27367887) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/ftEMrJbz)

### Commentary

Burnout syndrome (BOS) is triggered by a discrepancy between expectations and ideals of the employee and the actual requirements of the position they are employed in. It has 3 classic symptoms, which include exhaustion, de-personalisation, and reduced accomplishment. BOS can be measured by the Maslach Inventory, although there are no accepted cut offs that define whether BOS is present or not. BOS is common in ICU with a prevalence of between 25 and 71%. Examples of risk factors for BOS, which can be divided into personal and environmental, include being self-critical and sleep deprived and having an increased workload and perceived lack of control over that environment. BOS can be harmful to the individual with PTSD, alcohol abuse and suicidal ideation all described. It can be harmful to the ICU as it increases staff turnover and it can be detrimental to patient care. No one intervention is likely to help prevent BOS and a multi-dimensional approach is advocated in this position statement. The conclusion of this call to action is that individuals, senior members of staff, hospitals, funding bodies, professional associations, academic institutions, advocacy groups and policy groups need to do more to recognise research and treat BOS in the ICU.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> Burnout syndrome (BOS) occurs in all types of health-care professionals and is especially common in individuals who care for critically ill patients. The development of BOS is related to an imbalance of personal characteristics of the employee and work-related issues or other organizational factors. BOS is associated with many deleterious consequences, including increased rates of job turnover, reduced patient satisfaction, and decreased quality of care. BOS also directly affects the mental health and physical well-being of the many critical care physicians, nurses, and other health-care professionals who practice worldwide. Until recently, BOS and other psychological disorders in critical care health-care professionals remained relatively unrecognized. To raise awareness of BOS, the Critical Care Societies Collaborative (CCSC) developed this call to action. The present article reviews the diagnostic criteria, prevalence, causative factors, and consequences of BOS. It also discusses potential interventions that may be used to prevent and treat BOS. Finally, we urge multiple stakeholders to help mitigate the development of BOS in critical care health-care professionals and diminish the harmful consequences of BOS, both for critical care health-care professionals and for patients.

Edited by __Lucy Yang__