---
layout: post
title: "Late mortality after sepsis: propensity matched cohort study"
modified: 2017-09-19T23:25:55
categories: articles
excerpt: "The greatest increase in mortality was within the first 90 days from the initial sepsis insult. (Reviewed by Alex Hunter)"
tags: [['bmj', 'alex_hunter']]
image:
  feature:
author: Lucy Yang
---

__Alex Hunter__ reviewing Prescott HC, Osterholzer JJ, and Langa KM, et al. Late mortality after sepsis: propensity matched cohort study. _BMJ_ **2016**;353;i2375. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i2375

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=27189000) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/3K9Aozns)

### Commentary

This is a large retrospective observational study. A cohort of 960 Medicare beneficiary patients aged >65 admitted to hospital with sepsis were retrospectively matched to three comparison groups: 777 adults not currently in hospital, 788 patients admitted with non-sepsis infection, and 504 patients admitted with acute sterile inflammatory conditions. 

The primary outcome was mortality, and Kaplan-Meyer survival curves were generated for the sepsis and matched comparison cohorts. Sepsis was associated with increased mortality compared with all 3 control groups (P<0.001 for each comparison). In particular, compared to adults not in hospital, this increased mortality persists for up to 2 years. The greatest increase in mortality was within the first 90 days from the initial sepsis insult. 

One limitation of this study is that this is an observational study, and there were unmatched patients omitted from analysis and missing information from the surveys that were imputed with multiple imputation. There was also no differentiation between patients for severity of sepsis nor intensity of treatment. Further research is needed to delineate and understand the mechanisms for mortality after sepsis.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> OBJECTIVES: To determine whether late mortality after sepsis is driven predominantly by pre-existing comorbid disease or is the result of sepsis itself. DEIGN: Observational cohort study. SETTING: US Health and Retirement Study. PARTICIPANTS: 960 patients aged >/=65 (1998-2010) with fee-for-service Medicare coverage who were admitted to hospital with sepsis. Patients were matched to 777 adults not currently in hospital, 788 patients admitted with non-sepsis infection, and 504 patients admitted with acute sterile inflammatory conditions. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Late (31 days to two years) mortality and odds of death at various intervals. RESULTS: Sepsis was associated with a 22.1% (95% confidence interval 17.5% to 26.7%) absolute increase in late mortality relative to adults not in hospital, a 10.4% (5.4% to 15.4%) absolute increase relative to patients admitted with non-sepsis infection, and a 16.2% (10.2% to 22.2%) absolute increase relative to patients admitted with sterile inflammatory conditions (P<0.001 for each comparison). Mortality remained higher for at least two years relative to adults not in hospital. CONCLUSIONS: More than one in five patients who survives sepsis has a late death not explained by health status before sepsis.

Edited by __Lucy Yang__