---
layout: post
title: "Standardized Rehabilitation and Hospital Length of Stay Among Patients With Acute Respiratory Failure: A Randomized Clinical Trial."
modified: 2017-09-19T22:12:46
categories: articles
excerpt: "IMPORTANCE: Physical rehabilitation in the intensive care unit (ICU) may improve the outcomes of patients with acute respiratory failure. OBJECTIVE: To compare standardized rehabilitation therapy (SRT) to usual ICU care (Reviewed by Sue Yan)"
tags: [['jama', 'sue_yan']]
image:
  feature:
author: Jennifer Hunter
---

__Sue Yan__ reviewing Morris PE, Berry MJ, and Files DC, et al. Standardized Rehabilitation and Hospital Length of Stay Among Patients With Acute Respiratory Failure: A Randomized Clinical Trial. _JAMA_ **2016**;315;2694-702. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.7201

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=27367766) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/eml7TBCg)

### Commentary

## Summary

Acute respiratory failure is a common reason for admission and prolonged ITU stay. It is associated with increased mortality and morbidity and can reduce muscle function and quality of life in patients who survive. This single centre randomised trial compared standardised rehabilitation therapy (SRT) with usual care in ICU patients with respiratory failure. Patients were randomised to receive either a programme of physiotherapy comprising passive range of motion, physical therapy and resistance exercises delivered 7 days a week, and standard physiotherapy when dictated by the medical team. The primary outcome was hospital length of stay. Secondary outcomes were measured at ICU, hospital discharge and 2, 4 and 6 months post enrolment.

**This study found no difference in hospital length of stay between the two groups.** Higher secondary outcome scores at 6 months were found in the SRT group for Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) Score (difference 2.4 [95% CI, -1.2 to 6] p=.04), SF-36 score (difference 12.2 [95% CI, 0.04 to 2.1, p=.001) and Functional Performance Inventory (difference 0.2 [95% CI, 0.04 to 0.4], p=.02). There was no difference in other secondary outcomes: ventilator and ICU days, handheld dynamometer, handgrip, MMSE, mental health and physical function scale score.

The study concluded that whilst this intervention had no immediate effect on hospital length of stay, there may be a case for exploring the effects of such therapy on long term outcomes.

## Comment

Patients in this study were appropriately matched for demographics between the treatment and control groups. However a wide exclusion criteria was applied (4804 screened vs 618 eligible vs 300 consented to be randomised) creating a focus on a specific group of patients who were young with no prior lung disease and a short hospital stay. Therefore the generalisability of this study to a true ITU population, especially one in the UK, is extremely limited. In each group there was also a large proportion of patients lost to follow up [29/150 (SRT) and 25/150 (UC)] making interpretation of secondary outcomes difficult. Nevertheless the study shows that there may be value in scoring systems such as SF-36 and SPPB in evaluating long term outcomes from physiotherapy in ITU patients.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> IMPORTANCE: Physical rehabilitation in the intensive care unit (ICU) may improve the outcomes of patients with acute respiratory failure. OBJECTIVE: To compare standardized rehabilitation therapy (SRT) to usual ICU care in acute respiratory failure. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Single-center, randomized clinical trial at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center, North Carolina. Adult patients (mean age, 58 years; women, 55%) admitted to the ICU with acute respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation were randomized to SRT (n=150) or usual care (n=150) from October 2009 through May 2014 with 6-month follow-up. INTERVENTIONS: Patients in the SRT group received daily therapy until hospital discharge, consisting of passive range of motion, physical therapy, and progressive resistance exercise. The usual care group received weekday physical therapy when ordered by the clinical team. For the SRT group, the median (interquartile range [IQR]) days of delivery of therapy were 8.0 (5.0-14.0) for passive range of motion, 5.0 (3.0-8.0) for physical therapy, and 3.0 (1.0-5.0) for progressive resistance exercise. The median days of delivery of physical therapy for the usual care group was 1.0 (IQR, 0.0-8.0). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Both groups underwent assessor-blinded testing at ICU and hospital discharge and at 2, 4, and 6 months. The primary outcome was hospital length of stay (LOS). Secondary outcomes were ventilator days, ICU days, Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) score, 36-item Short-Form Health Surveys (SF-36) for physical and mental health and physical function scale score, Functional Performance Inventory (FPI) score, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score, and handgrip and handheld dynamometer strength. RESULTS: Among 300 randomized patients, the median hospital LOS was 10 days (IQR, 6 to 17) for the SRT group and 10 days (IQR, 7 to 16) for the usual care group (median difference, 0 [95% CI, -1.5 to 3], P = .41). There was no difference in duration of ventilation or ICU care. There was no effect at 6 months for handgrip (difference, 2.0 kg [95% CI, -1.3 to 5.4], P = .23) and handheld dynamometer strength (difference, 0.4 lb [95% CI, -2.9 to 3.7], P = .82), SF-36 physical health score (difference, 3.4 [95% CI, -0.02 to 7.0], P = .05), SF-36 mental health score (difference, 2.4 [95% CI, -1.2 to 6.0], P = .19), or MMSE score (difference, 0.6 [95% CI, -0.2 to 1.4], P = .17). There were higher scores at 6 months in the SRT group for the SPPB score (difference, 1.1 [95% CI, 0.04 to 2.1, P = .04), SF-36 physical function scale score (difference, 12.2 [95% CI, 3.8 to 20.7], P = .001), and the FPI score (difference, 0.2 [95% CI, 0.04 to 0.4], P = .02). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients hospitalized with acute respiratory failure, SRT compared with usual care did not decrease hospital LOS. TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00976833.

Edited by __Jennifer Hunter__
