---
layout: post
title: "Induced hypothermia in patients with septic shock and respiratory failure (CASS): a randomised, controlled, open-label trial."
modified: 2018-06-26T08:52:49
categories: articles
excerpt: "BACKGROUND: Animal models of serious infection suggest that 24 h of induced hypothermia improves circulatory and respiratory function and reduces mortality. We tested the hypothesis that a reduction of core (Reviewed by Roberto Vietri)"
tags: [['lancet_respir_med', 'roberto_vietri']]
image:
  feature:
author: Rob Tidswell
---

__Roberto Vietri__ reviewing Itenov TS, Johansen ME, and Bestle M, et al. Induced hypothermia in patients with septic shock and respiratory failure (CASS): a randomised, controlled, open-label trial. _Lancet Respir Med_ **2018**;6;183-192. https://doi.org/S2213-2600(18)30004-3

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=29325753) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/UvFXmG0v)

### Commentary

Background Animal models of serious infection suggest that 24 h of induced hypothermia improves circulatory and
respiratory function and reduces mortality. We tested the hypothesis that a reduction of core temperature to
3234C attenuates organ dysfunction and reduces mortality in ventilator-dependent patients with septic shock.
Methods In this randomised, controlled, open-label trial, we recruited patients from ten intensive care units (ICUs) in
three countries in Europe and North America. Inclusion criteria for patients with severe sepsis or septic shock were a
mean arterial pressure of less than 70 mm Hg, mechanical ventilation in an ICU, age at least 50 years, predicted
length of stay in the ICU at least 24 h, and recruitment into the study within 6 h of fulfilling inclusion criteria.
Exclusion criteria were uncontrolled bleeding, clinically important bleeding disorder, recent open surgery, pregnancy
or breastfeeding, or involuntary psychiatric admission. We randomly allocated patients 1:1 (with variable block sizes
ranging from four to eight; stratified by predictors of mortality, age, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation
II score, and study site) to routine thermal management or 24 h of induced hypothermia (target 3234C) followed by
48 h of normothermia (3638C). The primary endpoint was 30 day all-cause mortality in the modified intention-to-treat
population (all randomly allocated patients except those for whom consent was withdrawn or who were discovered to
meet an exclusion criterion after randomisation but before receiving the trial intervention). Patients and health-care
professionals giving the intervention were not masked to treatment allocation, but assessors of the primary outcome
were. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01455116.
Findings Between Nov 1, 2011, and Nov 4, 2016, we screened 5695 patients. After recruitment of 436 of the planned
560 participants, the trial was terminated for futility (220 [50%] randomly allocated to hypothermia and 216 [50%] to
routine thermal management). In the hypothermia group, 96 (442%) of 217 died within 30 days versus 77 (358%)
of 215 in the routine thermal management group (difference 84% [95% CI 08 to 176]; relative risk 12 [1016];
p=007]).
Interpretation Among patients with septic shock and ventilator-dependent respiratory failure, induced hypothermia
does not reduce mortality. Induced hypothermia should not be used in patients with septic shock.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> BACKGROUND: Animal models of serious infection suggest that 24 h of induced hypothermia improves circulatory and respiratory function and reduces mortality. We tested the hypothesis that a reduction of core temperature to 32-34 degrees C attenuates organ dysfunction and reduces mortality in ventilator-dependent patients with septic shock. METHODS: In this randomised, controlled, open-label trial, we recruited patients from ten intensive care units (ICUs) in three countries in Europe and North America. Inclusion criteria for patients with severe sepsis or septic shock were a mean arterial pressure of less than 70 mm Hg, mechanical ventilation in an ICU, age at least 50 years, predicted length of stay in the ICU at least 24 h, and recruitment into the study within 6 h of fulfilling inclusion criteria. Exclusion criteria were uncontrolled bleeding, clinically important bleeding disorder, recent open surgery, pregnancy or breastfeeding, or involuntary psychiatric admission. We randomly allocated patients 1:1 (with variable block sizes ranging from four to eight; stratified by predictors of mortality, age, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II score, and study site) to routine thermal management or 24 h of induced hypothermia (target 32-34 degrees C) followed by 48 h of normothermia (36-38 degrees C). The primary endpoint was 30 day all-cause mortality in the modified intention-to-treat population (all randomly allocated patients except those for whom consent was withdrawn or who were discovered to meet an exclusion criterion after randomisation but before receiving the trial intervention). Patients and health-care professionals giving the intervention were not masked to treatment allocation, but assessors of the primary outcome were. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01455116. FINDINGS: Between Nov 1, 2011, and Nov 4, 2016, we screened 5695 patients. After recruitment of 436 of the planned 560 participants, the trial was terminated for futility (220 [50%] randomly allocated to hypothermia and 216 [50%] to routine thermal management). In the hypothermia group, 96 (44.2%) of 217 died within 30 days versus 77 (35.8%) of 215 in the routine thermal management group (difference 8.4% [95% CI -0.8 to 17.6]; relative risk 1.2 [1.0-1.6]; p=0.07]). INTERPRETATION: Among patients with septic shock and ventilator-dependent respiratory failure, induced hypothermia does not reduce mortality. Induced hypothermia should not be used in patients with septic shock. FUNDING: Trygfonden, Lundbeckfonden, and the Danish National Research Foundation.

Edited by __Rob Tidswell__