---
layout: post
title: "Liberal vs. Restrictive Fluid Administration in Major Surgery"
modified: 2018-07-31T18:20:32
categories: articles
excerpt: "BACKGROUND: Guidelines to promote the early recovery of patients undergoing major surgery recommend a restrictive intravenous-fluid strategy for abdominal surgery. However, the supporting evidence is limited, and there is concern (Reviewed by Dr Caroline Fitton)"
tags: [['n_engl_j_med', 'dr_caroline_fitton']]
image:
  feature:
author: Dr Rob Tidswell
---

__Dr Caroline Fitton__ reviewing Myles PS, Bellomo R, and Corcoran T, et al. Restrictive versus Liberal Fluid Therapy for Major Abdominal Surgery. _N Engl J Med_ **2018**;378;2263-2274. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1801601

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=29742967) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/gGo6R2fq)

### Commentary

The RELIEF trial was a well-designed large pragmatic international randomised control trial.  The aim was to test whether a restrictive fluid regime compared to a liberal fluid regime in adult patients at increased risks of surgical complications undergoing major abdominal surgery improves disability-free survival at one year and reduces complications.  Key secondary outcomes tested were acute kidney injury at 30 days, renal replacement therapy at 90 days, a composite of septic complications, surgical site infection or death.   
Patients, 3000 in total, were randomly assigned to a restrictive or liberal fluid regime during and up to 24 hours after surgery, 1490 patients in the restrictive fluid regime had a median intra-venous fluid intake of 3.7 litres as compared with 6.1 litres in the liberal group.  Results from the trial found no difference in rates of disability-free survival at 1 year in either group, 81.9% in restrictive group and 82.3% in liberal fluid group (hazard ratio for death or disability, 1.05; 95% CI, 0.88 to 1.24; P=0.61). The rate of acute kidney injury was higher in the restrictive fluid group, 8.6% vs 5.0% in the liberal group.  Renal replacement therapy at 90 days and surgical site infection were higher in the restrictive group however did not reach statistical significance after adjustment for multiple analyses.
Restrictive group patients were more likely to receive vasopressor support, have lower urine outputs, greater incidence of oliguria or anuria but less likely to receive blood transfusions.
The trial set an important and applicable research question with a chosen outcome meaningful to patients.  Statistical methods were appropriate and trail design pragmatic.  There were certain limitations to the trial; clinicians administering fluids could not be blinded.  The trial dictated fluid during the first 24 hours after surgery however the administration of later fluid therapy was not controlled. 
Authors conclusion was that among patients at increased risk for complications during elective major abdominal surgery, a restrictive fluid regimen was not associated with a higher rate of disability-free survival than a liberal regime and was associated with a higher rate of acute kidney injury

---

### Pubmed abstract

> BACKGROUND: Guidelines to promote the early recovery of patients undergoing major surgery recommend a restrictive intravenous-fluid strategy for abdominal surgery. However, the supporting evidence is limited, and there is concern about impaired organ perfusion. METHODS: In a pragmatic, international trial, we randomly assigned 3000 patients who had an increased risk of complications while undergoing major abdominal surgery to receive a restrictive or liberal intravenous-fluid regimen during and up to 24 hours after surgery. The primary outcome was disability-free survival at 1 year. Key secondary outcomes were acute kidney injury at 30 days, renal-replacement therapy at 90 days, and a composite of septic complications, surgical-site infection, or death. RESULTS: During and up to 24 hours after surgery, 1490 patients in the restrictive fluid group had a median intravenous-fluid intake of 3.7 liters (interquartile range, 2.9 to 4.9), as compared with 6.1 liters (interquartile range, 5.0 to 7.4) in 1493 patients in the liberal fluid group (P<0.001). The rate of disability-free survival at 1 year was 81.9% in the restrictive fluid group and 82.3% in the liberal fluid group (hazard ratio for death or disability, 1.05; 95% confidence interval, 0.88 to 1.24; P=0.61). The rate of acute kidney injury was 8.6% in the restrictive fluid group and 5.0% in the liberal fluid group (P<0.001). The rate of septic complications or death was 21.8% in the restrictive fluid group and 19.8% in the liberal fluid group (P=0.19); rates of surgical-site infection (16.5% vs. 13.6%, P=0.02) and renal-replacement therapy (0.9% vs. 0.3%, P=0.048) were higher in the restrictive fluid group, but the between-group difference was not significant after adjustment for multiple testing. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients at increased risk for complications during major abdominal surgery, a restrictive fluid regimen was not associated with a higher rate of disability-free survival than a liberal fluid regimen and was associated with a higher rate of acute kidney injury. (Funded by the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council and others; RELIEF ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01424150 .).

Edited by __Dr Rob Tidswell__