---
layout: post
title: "Haloperidol Doesn't Prevent Delirium in Critically Ill Patients"
modified: 2018-06-26T08:52:50
categories: articles
excerpt: "Importance: Results of studies on use of prophylactic haloperidol in critically ill adults are inconclusive, especially in patients at high risk of delirium. Objective: To determine whether prophylactic use of (Reviewed by Jennie Overend)"
tags: [['jama', 'jennie_overend']]
image:
  feature:
author: Rob Tidswell
---

__Jennie Overend__ reviewing van den Boogaard M, Slooter AJC, and Bruggemann RJM, et al. Effect of Haloperidol on Survival Among Critically Ill Adults With a High Risk of Delirium: The REDUCE Randomized Clinical Trial. _JAMA_ **2018**;319;680-690. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.0160

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=29466591) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/lqrYkyKS)

### Commentary

This paper was a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study conducted over a three year period across 21 ICUs in the Netherlands. It investigated the effect of prophylactic haloperidol administration compared with placebo in critically ill adult patients at high risk of developing delirium. The primary outcome was mortality and secondary outcomes included length of ICU stay, hospital stay and delirium incidence amongst others. The study found no difference in the median days patients survived in 28 days. The study also found no difference in any of the 15 secondary outcomes between groups. The strengths of the study were the large multi centre double blinded randomised design. The weaknesses of the study identified were the original power calculation based on one previous study by the same author, in addition to the focus on mortality as a primary outcome. Although the findings of this study are relevant to our practice and do not support the use of prophylactic haloperidol, a focus on other outcomes rather than mortality may have been more useful.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> Importance: Results of studies on use of prophylactic haloperidol in critically ill adults are inconclusive, especially in patients at high risk of delirium. Objective: To determine whether prophylactic use of haloperidol improves survival among critically ill adults at high risk of delirium, which was defined as an anticipated intensive care unit (ICU) stay of at least 2 days. Design, Setting, and Participants: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled investigator-driven study involving 1789 critically ill adults treated at 21 ICUs, at which nonpharmacological interventions for delirium prevention are routinely used in the Netherlands. Patients without delirium whose expected ICU stay was at least a day were included. Recruitment was from July 2013 to December 2016 and follow-up was conducted at 90 days with the final follow-up on March 1, 2017. Interventions: Patients received prophylactic treatment 3 times daily intravenously either 1 mg (n = 350) or 2 mg (n = 732) of haloperidol or placebo (n = 707), consisting of 0.9% sodium chloride. Main Outcome and Measures: The primary outcome was the number of days that patients survived in 28 days. There were 15 secondary outcomes, including delirium incidence, 28-day delirium-free and coma-free days, duration of mechanical ventilation, and ICU and hospital length of stay. Results: All 1789 randomized patients (mean, age 66.6 years [SD, 12.6]; 1099 men [61.4%]) completed the study. The 1-mg haloperidol group was prematurely stopped because of futility. There was no difference in the median days patients survived in 28 days, 28 days in the 2-mg haloperidol group vs 28 days in the placebo group, for a difference of 0 days (95% CI, 0-0; P = .93) and a hazard ratio of 1.003 (95% CI, 0.78-1.30, P=.82). All of the 15 secondary outcomes were not statistically different. These included delirium incidence (mean difference, 1.5%, 95% CI, -3.6% to 6.7%), delirium-free and coma-free days (mean difference, 0 days, 95% CI, 0-0 days), and duration of mechanical ventilation, ICU, and hospital length of stay (mean difference, 0 days, 95% CI, 0-0 days for all 3 measures). The number of reported adverse effects did not differ between groups (2 [0.3%] for the 2-mg haloperidol group vs 1 [0.1%] for the placebo group). Conclusions and Relevance: Among critically ill adults at high risk of delirium, the use of prophylactic haloperidol compared with placebo did not improve survival at 28 days. These findings do not support the use of prophylactic haloperidol for reducing mortality in critically ill adults. Trial Registration: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01785290.

Edited by __Rob Tidswell__