---
layout: post
title: "Prolonged Infusion Piperacillin-Tazobactam Decreases Mortality and Improves Outcomes in Severely Ill Patients: Results of a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Crit Care Med. 2018"
modified: 2018-05-30T17:24:12
categories: articles
excerpt: "Further evidence required to change practice to using prolonged infusion regimes of antibiotics over bolus administration (Reviewed by Dr J Wijesuriya)"
tags: [['crit_care_med', 'dr_j_wijesuriya']]
image:
  feature:
author: Dr A Hunter
---

__Dr J Wijesuriya__ reviewing Rhodes NJ, Liu J, and O'Donnell JN, et al. Prolonged Infusion Piperacillin-Tazobactam Decreases Mortality and Improves Outcomes in Severely Ill Patients: Results of a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. _Crit Care Med_ **2018**;46;236-243. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000002836

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=29116995) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/3KAe0ntn)

### Commentary

This paper was a meta-analysis of studies comparing prolonged Tazocin infusions (of 3, 4 or 24 hours) with intermittent bolus administration for the treatment of severely ill hospitalised adult patients. The study found improved overall mortality and cure rates with prolonged infusion regimes, but no difference in hospital or ICU length of stay. 

The study was well conducted however the included papers were of variable quality. Furthermore there is uncertain applicability to patients in renal failure, on renal replacement therapy, immunosuppressed, on multiple antibiotic regimes or with antimicrobial resistant pathogens. 

The most robust recent RCT on the topic found no difference in outcomes. Implementing continuous infusions of antibiotics has financial, resource and practical implications and there is an as yet unquantified potential for enhancing antimicrobial resistance. As such further evidence is required to change practice.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> OBJECTIVE: Piperacillin-tazobactam is a commonly used antibiotic in critically ill patients; however, controversy exists as to whether mortality in serious infections can be decreased through administration by prolonged infusion compared with intermittent infusion. The purpose of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to describe the impact of prolonged infusion piperacillin-tazobactam schemes on clinical endpoints in severely ill patients. DESIGN: We conducted a systematic literature review and meta-analysis searching MEDLINE, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature, and the Cochrane Library from inception to April 1, 2017, for studies. INTERVENTIONS: Mortality rates were compared between severely ill patients receiving piperacillin-tazobactam via prolonged infusion or intermittent infusion. Included studies must have reported severity of illness scores, which were transformed into average study-level mortality probabilities. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Two investigators independently screened titles, abstracts, and full texts of studies meeting inclusion criteria for this systematic review and meta-analysis. Variables included author name, publication year, study design, demographics, total daily dose(s), average estimated creatinine clearance, type of prolonged infusion, prevalence of combination therapy, severity of illness scores, infectious sources, all-cause mortality, clinical cure, microbiological cure, and hospital and ICU length of stay. The review identified 18 studies including 3,401 patients who received piperacillin-tazobactam, 56.7% via prolonged infusion. Across all studies, the majority of patients had an identified primary infectious source. Receipt of prolonged infusion was associated with a 1.46-fold lower odds of mortality (95% CI, 1.20-1.77) in the pooled analysis. Patients receiving prolonged infusion had a 1.77-fold higher odds of clinical cure (95% CI, 1.24-2.54) and a 1.22-fold higher odds of microbiological cure (95% CI, 0.84-1.77). Subanalyses were conducted according to high (>/= 20%) and low (< 20%) average study-level mortality probabilities. In studies reporting higher mortality probabilities, effect sizes were variable but similar to the pooled results. CONCLUSIONS: Receipt of prolonged infusion of piperacillin-tazobactam was associated with reduced mortality and improved clinical cure rates across diverse cohorts of severely ill patients.

Edited by __Dr A Hunter__