---
layout: post
title: "Prediction of early unplanned intensive care unit readmission in a UK tertiary care hospital: a cross-sectional machine learning approach"
modified: 2018-01-10T18:33:56
categories: articles
excerpt: "Transfer classifier trained using a combination of Beth Israel Deaconess and Cambridge University data may help predict unplanned ICU readmi (Reviewed by Dr Lucy Yang)"
tags: [['bmj_open', 'dr_lucy_yang']]
image:
  feature:
author: Dr Alex Hunter
---

__Dr Lucy Yang__ reviewing Desautels T, Das R, and Calvert J, et al. Prediction of early unplanned intensive care unit readmission in a UK tertiary care hospital: a cross-sectional machine learning approach. _BMJ Open_ **2017**;7;e017199. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017199

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=28918412) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/zmCGsE3T)

### Commentary

This is a collaborative retrospective analysis between Dascena, California, USA and Addenbrookes hospital in Cambridge, UK. The aim was to develop a more sophisticated system or algorithm that is able to appreciate subtle and multidimensional time trends in predicting early unplanned intensive care unit readmission. 

The hypothesis was that the algorithmic predictor would deliver statistically significantly superior performance over the previously published purpose-built Stability and Workload Index for Transfer (SWIFT) score (Gajic et al. Crit Care Med 2008;36:676-682), as measured by area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) in 10-fold cross-validation.  

Data were collected from EPIC electronic documentation system (Epic Systems, Verona, WI, USA), and the data set contained a total of 2018 ICU episodes. Variables recorded included patient age, vital signs and laboratory data, discharge from ICU and outcome. Any patient who returned to the ICU or died in hospital within 48 hours was labelled as Class 1 (adverse outcome); this assumes that a patient who died in another ward should have been transferred back to the ICU. Patients who were down-transferred and discharged are Class 0 (no adverse outcome). 

The final data set were divided into 10 cross-validation folds. For each fold, data was normalised, and the predictor model was trained on the other folds. The predictor was a boosted ensemble of 1000 decision trees and all classifiers were constructed using Adaboost which combines results from weak decision trees in an iterative fashion. Cambridge University hospitals data was compared to the calculated SWIFT score in a AUROC analysis. Authors then used data from Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care database (MIMIC-III; a Collection of over 50000 ICU stays at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Centre in Boston, MA between 2001 and 2012), and treated the CUH data as target. 
	
The AUCROC for predicting ICU readmission using the SWIFT score was 0.60, using only Cambridge data was 0.61, using only MIMIC-III was 0.61, and using the transfer method of both MIMIC-III and Cambridge data, where Cambridge data were weighted over two times that of MIMIC-III, was 0.71 (SE=0.026), which was significantly different from using the SWIFT score (one tailed students t test p=0.014). However, the clinical significance of this is uncertain, as there was no clear distinction of the patients who were palliatively discharged to the ward. The paper made no reference as to how much missing data were imputed, and confidence intervals were not quoted for the AUCROC. The authors made no comments on the impact of each individual parameter (e.g. patient age, vital signs, or lab data), thus, made no suggestion on the reason behind unplanned readmissions.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> OBJECTIVES: Unplanned readmissions to the intensive care unit (ICU) are highly undesirable, increasing variance in care, making resource planning difficult and potentially increasing length of stay and mortality in some settings. Identifying patients who are likely to suffer unplanned ICU readmission could reduce the frequency of this adverse event. SETTING: A single academic, tertiary care hospital in the UK. PARTICIPANTS: A set of 3326 ICU episodes collected between October 2014 and August 2016. All records were of patients who visited an ICU at some point during their stay. We excluded patients who were </=16 years of age; visited ICUs other than the general and neurosciences ICU; were missing crucial electronic patient record measurements; or had indeterminate ICU discharge outcomes or very early or extremely late discharge times. After exclusion, 2018 outcome-labelled episodes remained. PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: Area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) for prediction of unplanned ICU readmission or in-hospital death within 48 hours of first ICU discharge. RESULTS: In 10-fold cross-validation, an ensemble predictor was trained on data from both the target hospital and the Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care (MIMIC-III) database and tested on the target hospital's data. This predictor discriminated between patients with the unplanned ICU readmission or death outcome and those without this outcome, attaining mean AUROC of 0.7095 (SE 0.0260), superior to the purpose-built Stability and Workload Index for Transfer (SWIFT) score (AUROC=0.6082, SE 0.0249; p=0.014, pairwise t-test). CONCLUSIONS: Despite the inherent difficulties, we demonstrate that a novel machine learning algorithm based on transfer learning could achieve good discrimination, over and above that of the treating clinicians or the value added by the SWIFT score. Accurate prediction of unplanned readmission could be used to target resources more efficiently.

Edited by __Dr Alex Hunter__