---
layout: post
title: "Outcomes after Angiography with Sodium Bicarbonate and Acetylcysteine"
modified: 2018-05-31T08:01:10
categories: articles
excerpt: "Multicentre RCT finds no difference in AKI rate with sodium bicarb and acetylcysteine (Reviewed by Dr Shamil Tanna)"
tags: [['n_engl_j_med', 'dr_shamil_tanna']]
image:
  feature:
author: Dr A Hunter
---

__Dr Shamil Tanna__ reviewing Weisbord SD, Gallagher M, and Jneid H, et al. Outcomes after Angiography with Sodium Bicarbonate and Acetylcysteine. _N Engl J Med_ **2018**;378;603-614. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1710933

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=29130810) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/pZxoZzck)

### Commentary

A multicentre randomised controlled trial investigating the effect of IV bicarbonate vs. IV sodium chloride and oral acetylcysteine vs. placebo for the prevention of major adverse outcomes and AKI in a large population of high-risk patients undergoing coronary or non-coronary angiography. Previous studies have failed to show benefit of acetylcysteine and bicarbonate over saline hydration. 

A randomised, double blind study (2x2 factorial design) was conducted  in those patients with Stage 3 or 4 CKD (or 3A with Diabetes Mellitus) across 53 centres over a 4 year period undergoing angiography (emergency angiography and patients with an unstable baseline creatinine were excluded). Primary endpoint was death, need for dialysis, or >50% increase in creatinine 90104 days post angiography. Study arms were IV Bicarbonate vs. IV NaCL and oral acetylcysteine vs. oral placebo. The authors found no difference in primary end point across all four groups and in addition the rate of AKI at 3-5 days post angiography showed no statistical difference.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> BACKGROUND: Intravenous sodium bicarbonate and oral acetylcysteine are widely used to prevent acute kidney injury and associated adverse outcomes after angiography without definitive evidence of their efficacy. METHODS: Using a 2-by-2 factorial design, we randomly assigned 5177 patients at high risk for renal complications who were scheduled for angiography to receive intravenous 1.26% sodium bicarbonate or intravenous 0.9% sodium chloride and 5 days of oral acetylcysteine or oral placebo; of these patients, 4993 were included in the modified intention-to-treat analysis. The primary end point was a composite of death, the need for dialysis, or a persistent increase of at least 50% from baseline in the serum creatinine level at 90 days. Contrast-associated acute kidney injury was a secondary end point. RESULTS: The sponsor stopped the trial after a prespecified interim analysis. There was no interaction between sodium bicarbonate and acetylcysteine with respect to the primary end point (P=0.33). The primary end point occurred in 110 of 2511 patients (4.4%) in the sodium bicarbonate group as compared with 116 of 2482 (4.7%) in the sodium chloride group (odds ratio, 0.93; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.72 to 1.22; P=0.62) and in 114 of 2495 patients (4.6%) in the acetylcysteine group as compared with 112 of 2498 (4.5%) in the placebo group (odds ratio, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.78 to 1.33; P=0.88). There were no significant between-group differences in the rates of contrast-associated acute kidney injury. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients at high risk for renal complications who were undergoing angiography, there was no benefit of intravenous sodium bicarbonate over intravenous sodium chloride or of oral acetylcysteine over placebo for the prevention of death, need for dialysis, or persistent decline in kidney function at 90 days or for the prevention of contrast-associated acute kidney injury. (Funded by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Research and Development and the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia; PRESERVE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01467466 .).

Edited by __Dr A Hunter__