---
layout: post
title: "Extensive impact of non-antibiotic drugs on human gut bacteria"
modified: 2018-06-26T08:52:52
categories: articles
excerpt: "A few commonly used non-antibiotic drugs have recently been associated with changes in gut microbiome composition, but the extent of this phenomenon is unknown. Here, we screened more than 1,000 (Reviewed by Efrem Colonetti)"
tags: [['nature', 'efrem_colonetti']]
image:
  feature:
author: Rob Tidswell
---

__Efrem Colonetti__ reviewing Maier L, Pruteanu M, and Kuhn M, et al. Extensive impact of non-antibiotic drugs on human gut bacteria. _Nature_ **2018**;555;623-628. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25979

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=29555994) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/GochNeAY)

### Commentary

The authors used a high-throughput technique to systematically map interactions between a library of chemical compounds (mainly drugs) and 38 strains of bacteria highly representative of the human gut microbiome. Their results showed that, as expected, antibacterial compounds had a very high antimicrobial activity, and that, more interestingly, 24% of human-targeted drugs were active against at least one strain. The authors added that this result is most likely very underestimated because the technique used implied standard doses of drugs, often much lower than the concentration they estimated would be found in the gut of patients taking these medications. They also identified specific classes of drugs which seems to be more active than others against the microbiome and they considered the possibility that for some of these, like antipsychotics, their activity against the microbiome could be a mechanism of action rather than a side effect. Moreover, they observed that in bacteria there are overlapping mechanisms of resistance between antibiotics and human targeted drugs and that antibiotic resistance can be acquired consuming non-antibiotic drugs.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> A few commonly used non-antibiotic drugs have recently been associated with changes in gut microbiome composition, but the extent of this phenomenon is unknown. Here, we screened more than 1,000 marketed drugs against 40 representative gut bacterial strains, and found that 24% of the drugs with human targets, including members of all therapeutic classes, inhibited the growth of at least one strain in vitro. Particular classes, such as the chemically diverse antipsychotics, were overrepresented in this group. The effects of human-targeted drugs on gut bacteria are reflected on their antibiotic-like side effects in humans and are concordant with existing human cohort studies. Susceptibility to antibiotics and human-targeted drugs correlates across bacterial species, suggesting common resistance mechanisms, which we verified for some drugs. The potential risk of non-antibiotics promoting antibiotic resistance warrants further exploration. Our results provide a resource for future research on drug-microbiome interactions, opening new paths for side effect control and drug repurposing, and broadening our view of antibiotic resistance.

Edited by __Rob Tidswell__