---
layout: post
title: "Which Models Can I Use to Predict Adult ICU Length of Stay? A Systematic Review"
modified: 2018-01-10T18:33:59
categories: articles
excerpt: "OBJECTIVE: We systematically reviewed models to predict adult ICU length of stay. DATA SOURCES: We searched the Ovid EMBASE and MEDLINE databases for studies on the development or validation of (Reviewed by Dr Efrem Colonetti)"
tags: [['crit_care_med', 'dr_efrem_colonetti']]
image:
  feature:
author: Dr Alex Hunter
---

__Dr Efrem Colonetti__ reviewing Verburg IW, Atashi A, and Eslami S, et al. Which Models Can I Use to Predict Adult ICU Length of Stay? A Systematic Review. _Crit Care Med_ **2017**;45;e222-e231. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000002054

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=27768612) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/9aHC8xUL)

### Commentary

Developing tools able to predict ICU length of stay (LoS) would be useful for planning resource allocation in a certain area or hospital, improving cost and efficiency. ICU LoS is used by clinicians to benchmark the performances of different ICUs with different patient populations and help to identify patients or groups of patients with unexpectedly long ICU stay. Different models have been developed to predict LoS but there is no consensus about their reliability.

In this systematic review the authors identified 13 original articles and used the the CHARMS checklist to assess the quality of reporting in the studies and defined four pre-determined requirements for prediction models in advance. These requirements were that the study included: variables to predicts LoS were published and available at 24 hours since admission, organizational characteristics were not included, low level of bias (moderate calibration) and accurate prediction (R2 of at least 0.36 across ICUs/patients). 
They assessed in depth how readmissions, deaths and special population (i.e. cardiac surgery) were considered by these models. 
Ultimately they concluded that no previously published models satify requirements for prediction models of ICU LoS. In particular none of studies showed a low level of bias and strong R2 across patients and only four studies showed strong R2 across ICUs.

Although these tools could be useful in practice they require a good specialised statistical knowledge and they cannot be extrapolated from the clinical and organisational context in which they were developed. They require at least a local recent validation study to ensure they produce accurate predictions.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> OBJECTIVE: We systematically reviewed models to predict adult ICU length of stay. DATA SOURCES: We searched the Ovid EMBASE and MEDLINE databases for studies on the development or validation of ICU length of stay prediction models. STUDY SELECTION: We identified 11 studies describing the development of 31 prediction models and three describing external validation of one of these models. DATA EXTRACTION: Clinicians use ICU length of stay predictions for planning ICU capacity, identifying unexpectedly long ICU length of stay, and benchmarking ICUs. We required the model variables to have been published and for the models to be free of organizational characteristics and to produce accurate predictions, as assessed by R across patients for planning and identifying unexpectedly long ICU length of stay and across ICUs for benchmarking, with low calibration bias. We assessed the reporting quality using the Checklist for Critical Appraisal and Data Extraction for Systematic Reviews of Prediction Modelling Studies. DATA SYNTHESIS: The number of admissions ranged from 253 to 178,503. Median ICU length of stay was between 2 and 6.9 days. Two studies had not published model variables and three included organizational characteristics. None of the models produced predictions with low bias. The R was 0.05-0.28 across patients and 0.01-0.64 across ICUs. The reporting scores ranged from 49 of 78 to 60 of 78 and the methodologic scores from 12 of 22 to 16 of 22. CONCLUSION: No models completely satisfy our requirements for planning, identifying unexpectedly long ICU length of stay, or for benchmarking purposes. Physicians using these models to predict ICU length of stay should interpret them with reservation.

Edited by __Dr Alex Hunter__