---
layout: post
title: "The Effects of Ibuprofen on the Physiology and Survival of Patients with Sepsis."
modified: 2018-07-31T18:20:30
categories: articles
excerpt: "OBJECTIVES: The objective was to compare the clinical and physiologic characteristics of febrile septic patients with hypothermic septic patients; and to examine plasma levels of cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha (Reviewed by Madeline Mathewman)"
tags: [['crit_care_med', 'madeline_mathewman']]
image:
  feature:
author: Rob Tidswell
---

__Madeline Mathewman__ reviewing Arons MM, Wheeler AP, and Bernard GR, et al. Effects of ibuprofen on the physiology and survival of hypothermic sepsis. Ibuprofen in Sepsis Study Group. _Crit Care Med_ **1999**;27;699-707. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10321658

Links: [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=10321658) [Trello](https://trello.com/c/tO8yIoQW)

### Commentary

This randomised control trial from 1997 was designed to investigate the effect of ibuprofen in sepsis. 455 patients met the inclusion criteria; half received IV ibuprofen (10mg/kg) every 6 hours for 48 hours, whilst the other half received placebo. There was no difference in 30-day mortality between the two groups (37% with ibuprofen vs 40% with placebo) and no difference in days without organ system dysfunction. Ibuprofen did significantly reduce heart rate, temperature, lactate levels and oxygen consumption compared to placebo. There was no difference in AKI, GI bleeding or secondary episode of sepsis, which led the authors to conclude that ibuprofen is safe in sepsis. Limitations of this study included no control of paracetamol administration (patients who did not receive ibuprofen had more fevers, which were subsequently treated with paracetamol). The inclusion criteria required at least 3 SIRS criteria, thus excluding many patients with SIRS negative sepsis. Also since Sepsis-3, SIRS criteria are now redundant in diagnosing sepsis. This paper has been included in a systematic review and meta-analysis published in May 2017 looking at the use of antipyretic therapy in critically ill septic patients.1 Eight observational and eight RCTs were included, which found no difference in 28-day mortality in septic patients who received antipyretic therapy compared to those that did not. The outcome suggests that treating fever in sepsis does not reduce mortality. At journal club we discussed that perhaps we should be crossing off paracetamol from our septic patients' drug charts, although paracetamol is also often also prescribed for its analgesic as well as antipyretic properties.

---

### Pubmed abstract

> OBJECTIVES: The objective was to compare the clinical and physiologic characteristics of febrile septic patients with hypothermic septic patients; and to examine plasma levels of cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha and interleukin 6 (IL-6) and the lipid mediators thromboxane B2 (TxB2) and prostacyclin in hypothermic septic patients in comparison with febrile patients. Most importantly, we wanted to report the effect of ibuprofen treatment on vital signs, organ failure, and mortality in hypothermic sepsis. SETTING: The study was performed in the intensive care units (ICUs) of seven clinical centers in the United States and Canada. PATIENTS: Four hundred fifty-five patients admitted to the ICU who met defined criteria for severe sepsis and were suspected of having a serious infection. INTERVENTION: Ibuprofen at a dose of 10 mg/kg (maximum 800 mg) was administered intravenously over 30 to 60 mins every 6 hrs for eight doses vs. placebo (glycine buffer vehicle). MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Forty-four (10%) septic patients met criteria for hypothermia and 409 were febrile. The mortality rate was significantly higher in hypothermic patients, 70% vs. 35% for febrile patients. At study entry, urinary metabolites of TxB2, prostacyclin, and serum levels of TNF-alpha and IL-6 were significantly elevated in hypothermic patients compared with febrile patients. In hypothermic patients treated with ibuprofen, there was a trend toward an increased number of days free of major organ system failures and a significant reduction in the 30-day mortality rate from 90% (18/20 placebo-treated patients) to 54% (13/24 ibuprofen-treated patients). CONCLUSIONS: Hypothermic sepsis has an incidence of approximately 10% and an untreated mortality twice that of severe sepsis presenting with fever. When compared with febrile patients, the hypothermic group has an amplified response with respect to cytokines TNF-alpha and IL-6 and lipid mediators TxB2 and prostacyclin. Treatment with ibuprofen may decrease mortality in this select group of septic patients.

Edited by __Rob Tidswell__